Okay, so today I will be giving the presentation. So my name is Dimitri Saharidis. I'm a professor at ULB. And the topic will be in some sense a continuation or a follow-up of the first topic that we heard from Alvaro about causality. So I will focus more on causality and expands. You might have heard of counterfactuals. So I'm going to talk today about how these, how good for explaining complex machine learning models and for ensuring that they are giving the appropriate results to the appropriate people. There is fairness, they don't discriminate. Okay, so I will. Let's start by talking about this book that you have heard in the first lecture.

So I would advise that you go and read this if you're interested not only on causality, but also on some historical facts about how probabilities were established and how the field progressed. into modern statistics and machine learning. So it is written by the, and also of a paradigm on how to talk about causality. So in his book and in his introduction, he talks about the different levels that people, climb during their evolution. So, and it makes the analogy with how humans evolve, with how machines or computational machines should think and should reason. And he starts by telling that the basic thing we humans do is actually observing. So we watch things, And from what we observe, we try to make sense of the world. So the questions we can ask. So imagine we have a scenario where there is a connection between vaccination, whether I will get a disease, in this case COVID, and whether I can have some side effects, some reaction. And these two things can lead to the death of a patient.

So by observing how people react to vaccines, we can answer questions like what is the chance that I get some side effects after vaccination? In statistics and probability, what is the methods to express this concept? So what is, how would you express this? So I'm giving you a hint. So these are events, right? So I can get vaccinated. I can get a reaction. So just to repeat, conditional probability, so it's the probability that I get some reaction given that I take a vaccine. All right? Same as the other questions.

I can, by observing and collecting enough data, I can give answers to such questions with reasonably good accuracy. So this level is called the association, or we observe things, and we can make some rudimentary associations. So this is the case where we have some correlations, right? So we observe correlations. So we observe, for example, that people that are vaccinated, are related to the people, there's a relationship between people vaccinated and people who have the COVID disease. So this is how humans start to evolve or very basic animals. But soon as we are born, we are actually doing things. So we are not merely observing, we are interacting with our world, we are making small interventions, we do things, and then we observe how these things affect the world, and then we begin how the world works. So you might have seen that babies, when they eat, they tend to drop things around. And the reason they do it is not because they want to annoy their parents, but because they want to understand gravity or how this works.

Or later on, they might begin to understand what are the. What are the rules? So what they can do, what they are not allowed to do. And they do things in order to understand how the world will go. This is the case of intervening to our world or we take actions, we do things. So for these things, now we are not looking at mere correlations. And I want to understand how often when that happens. So you might before there is any vaccination, I might want to do before I make it public, right? So I want to make sure what how effective a vaccine is. So how do you think companies do that?

I think it was mentioned in the first seminar. So just by observing. I cannot really be sure, right? So it's not enough to observe. And we also experiment on people, right? And yeah. So yeah. Is any weird things you start with animals, but eventually you need to have people. Do you know how these are called? There's a period before approving a vaccine that's.

Yes, yes. So it's trials. There's a full name. It's randomized control trials. So do you know what's what usually happens there? So there are people that are volunteers to participate. And how does this work? Anyone has any idea? Yeah, please. the control and the treatments, the treatment you give the actual vaccine, the control you give a placebo, something that is harmless.

And then you can see how effective a vaccine is, right? So you need to do some intervention, okay? And these sort of randomized control trials are a way of doing things. And they can lead us to answer questions like this, which cannot be expressed with just the language of probabilities. Or at least that is what you need some additional vocabulary to be able to do this. So, for example, this thing here would not be the. the probability that I survive COVID after getting, given that I took the vaccine. It's not this what we want, is the probability if I intervene and give the vaccine, what is my chances of surviving? So this is in the language that Judea Pearl uses, it's a do thing. Okay, so if you have seen this, maybe from the first seminar, it's a probability of something, not conditioned on something, but on doing something.

So this is slightly different, and it allows us to make conclusions about cause and effects, all right? And the third level, is where something that currently only people possess the ability to imagine, to imagine a different world, intervene on an existing world, but they imagine on hypothetical scenarios, hypothetical worlds. So this is the world where we talk about counterfactuals. So what's a factual? The factual is a world that we observe. Counterfactual is something imaginary that we cannot observe or we cannot experiment, but we can reason about it. We can think about it. For example, there's a specific person that died and didn't have the vaccine. So we would like to ask what are the chances that he would have lived. all right so this is clearly hypothetical we cannot take that person bring back to life and vaccinate him or her all right um so these are the the idea of answer questions what happens in imaginary uh worlds okay So this is the short introduction about causality and counterfactuals.

I'm going to now move into a short introduction about why we care about explainability in machine learning or in AI in general. All right. So here is a look of a pipeline, what typically happens. We have some training data and based on that we are through some process, we are learning some function, which is our model. And then we deploy this model that interacts with actual humans. So it gives decisions, recommendations, and the humans want to ask questions. They want to understand why was the specific outcome given by this model? Why this? Why not something else? how often do you make correct predictions or wrong predictions.

Essentially, the user wants to trust, to begin to understand how the model works so that the user can trust this. So these explanations or these explainable AI is targeted at the person who is either directly or indirectly affected. or the person who is deploying the system and wants to understand what are the implications of deploying a system. All right, so for example, AI. And so I've asked, I think, Gemini to create the separation between these two. So it came up with this nice looking infographic. Of course, there are many, many errors or typos here, but please look at the general picture. So the idea is that there are two different ways to achieve somehow the goal of explainable AI. One is to do what is to have in this case here, you pick models, systems that you can look and interpret. So just by looking at them, you can understand how they work.

So what are machine learning models that are really, really easy to understand? So it's the linear models, right? It's systems. So if you look at them, if you look at the decision tree, you can follow. And if the tree is shallow enough, you can probably follow the path to the leaf. and see there there are some, as you come to the lift, there are some if conditions. And then you know that the model picks this particular class because the input satisfies all these conditions. So it's relatively straightforward if you look at one of these models to understand what the model is doing. All right. So typically this is not the case though.

So we have more complex models or the models, and if we can, if we could look at them, we wouldn't understand many things because they are very, very complex. So these are recent. deep learning models where there is just the sheer amount of parameters, the weights, the numbers that are inside the network, make looking at this not very interpretable. Or there are other cases where we just don't have access to the model. We cannot even pick inside it. We can observe things that go in and go out. and try to understand how this works. So we talk about black box models, or we also call these post hoc explanations, post hoc explainability, which means that we are trying to make sense after we focus here on this is the most challenging case. So what can we do here? So there are different ways I'm going to continue with some categorization.

You can distinguish between methods that are agnostic to the model, so they can work no matter what exactly the machine learning model is, right? So you have a tool that is agnostic and can interpret any kind of machine learning model, right? Or you have techniques that are really dependent on a specific model or specific architecture. So, if you have, for example, some convolutional neural network, the method works by looking at the internal activations and giving you some explanation. So naturally this works only if you have access to the model and you are able to pick inside Right, so for our case we're going to be talking about general agnostic tools that do not look inside the model. All right, another distinction is between what you want to explain. You might want to explain a specific output and this is what we call local. All right, so there's a specific outcome. So I applied, I made a purchase online and then it was flagged as potential fraud. So I wasn't able to conclude this.

All right, so I want to understand for my case, what happened? So just for this instance, what was the thinking of the model? So this is the local explanation for a single prediction. But some other times we really don't want to focus on specific instances. And we might want to understand in general, how does the model behave? So to have a better global view of the model. And these are called global explanations. So we are going to see both local and global explanations. And the other aspect that is important to differentiate methods. So what is, how does the explanation look like?

So an explanation could be, I lost my pointer. So the explanation could be in terms of the importance of the input features, of the input characteristics. So it can tell you that this particular feature was mostly responsible for observing that output. It can give numbers to the features. All right, another thing we can do is give some sort of examples. So instead of saying which features are important, we are telling you, hey, here is one other example where you get the similar outputs. So maybe because your case looks like this and this is something that was done in the past, so you can understand or your case of giving values over the features, you are proposing different examples, probably with some scores that this example is closer to your case. What else can you do? You can try to simplify the model. So instead of having that complex model, we are distilling it, making it something very, very small.

and ideally something that is interpretable. So we can use a decision tree in place of a complex model, and then we can observe the decision tree. If it is close enough to the original, then we have some understanding. Now, these things are not always very, very distinct. So let me give you an example. If I, so you might, are from you might be familiar with feature importance so it tells that um this feature is um i don't know 20 important or it gives a plus 1. 3 or something you get a bunch of numbers for every feature does this look like um a simpler model to you so is um is the is one can also be seen as something like three let's see So if I give you numbers for every feature, I give you the importance. You can imagine this is something like a linear model, right? So what I'm doing here is I'm looking at this instance. Instead of looking at the complex model, I'm giving you a very simple linear model.

And to define something linear, you just need a number for every feature. So that's it. How about this case? If I give you a bunch of examples, I give you 10 examples. And I tell you, you're very similar to these examples, to these 10 examples. So this is why you get an answer. What kind of model, what kind of simple model can I create out of this? Or what would that model look like? In the case I give you feature importances, it's a linear model. If I give you 10 examples, how is this model called?

in the nearest neighbor classifier, for example. So I give you 10 points. In these 10 points, 9 had this label. So you know that the confidence of this outcome is 90%. Okay, so here we are going to be focusing on this category. I'm going to give you data points as an explanation. All right, so let's move at what does it mean to have a counterfactual explanation locally. So it's one particular instance I'm going to explain. And let me continue with a bit with causality to see how it relates. So we have something that we observe, the why, right?

And this is the effect. And then we want to find the cause. find this. So there are different ways. We can say, for example, that X is a necessary condition for Y, which means that whenever Y appears, X is also there. We can say something like it is a sufficient condition. So whenever we see X, immediately we get Y. So these are some strong guarantees. Or we can say something that looks like the necessity condition. So we can say that if we didn't see X, right, we would not see Y.

So written in words, if X had not occurred, then Y would not have occurred. So this is evidence that X is trying to apply to machine learning models. And how do we do that? So Y is the output, X is the input or the features, And we are trying to see how the ML model associates X with Y. So if we input X, we observe Y. And a counterfactual explanation for this particular Y is some changes that we do to the X. So we change X. We change X to X prime so that we get the opposite output. So x becomes x prime and then y becomes the opposite minus y if it is a multiplication. All right?

So we need to imagine a situation where x, which is the factual, no longer exists. There's instead an x prime, which is the counterfactual. All right? So we look for, we imagine counterfactual scenarios. And then what can we explain here? what can we define as the cause? So we can see what changed. So what are the changes? How did we go from X to X prime? And the change is an explanation for us, okay?

So just to be for the notation, X, the original inputs, we can call it the factual. X prime is a hypothetical input. We call this the change necessary to cause the opposite output. Okay, so let's give an example. So what's, so imagine we are in a situation where of people that apply for a loan, and it predicts whether they have income less or below, less or greater than 50K, right? So if Rosa's inputs get put into the model, the model says with 83% chance, Rosa has, so maybe we should not give the loan, right? But in this case, we want to understand, the manager might want to understand why, but also Rosa might also want to understand why. So why was my loan application declined, all right? So if we look at, so this is a binary model, so there is some, a decision boundary and Rosa lies on the negative class. So there's a decision boundary that separates her from the positive class.

And what we want here is we want her to cross the decision boundary. So instead of, we want to find what she needs to change. So what is this, let's say vector here that takes, okay, So how can we do that? What do you think then? I'll try. So when you say the requirements, you mean probably another person that got the loan. An example that they got the loan. And then we can see how different or how far Rosa is. We want to go to the other side of the boundary without actually knowing the boundary. So the problem is that we cannot really see the boundary or we cannot really know where it is, especially if we are in the black box situation.

Okay, so one thing we can try to do is make small changes to our data. So create multiple counterfactual instances. So this is the original ROSA. I'm gonna change ROSA in many different ways. I'm gonna take that counterfactual ROSA, put it through the machine learning model and see what are the outcomes, random choices or guided choices until I get something that is positive and then I'm happy, right? So this, might look something like this. So we are, the red point is the negative outcome. And this is the decision boundary. And we want to cross that. So we might, we don't know exactly where it is.

So we might pick points that are nearby. So points nearby means that the features change by little. And probably we increase how much they change over time until we, how hit, the boundary, which we don't see, and we get the positive outcome and we are happy. Once we find the positive outcome, then maybe we can see which way we should. So another visualization of this. So there's, we are typically going to be concerned with a negative class, and we are going to the red one, and we want to see how we can go to the green one. and we're going to display things on a plane, but this is not the reality, it's just a visual simplification we make so that we can see exactly what it means to go across the boundary. So one thing to notice is that there are many ways to cross the boundary. So if I go this direction, that direction, so what are the colors? Gold here, purple or copper.

Time will take me somewhere into the green area. So what does that mean? How do they differ? What is, let's say, direction in this space? What does it mean? it indicates how I change the input features. So if I go like this, I increase x1 and I increase x2. If I go like this, I decrease x2. So every feature can be actually, you can go increasing the value of that feature if everything is numerical. All right, so you can think of this.

There are many levers I can pull and control. And then I until I find it. So the gold, the purple, and the copper are as per the definition, they are counterfactual explanations, right? So in our example here, so Rosa could do, let's say, just two things. she could choose to increase her working hours from 40 to 65, change her education from bachelor's to master's, and then have one more year of experience. If she does any of these, she would get the positive outcome. So in some, in certain cases, it makes sense to look not at a single, a simple, a single, sorry, counterfactual, but diverse counterfactuals. Many counterfactuals that are actually other. So they give alternative ways to achieve counterfactual, to achieve the positive outcome. Just think about the change we have to create this as well.

We consider that you have a more conscious decision. So there are two things here. If values have infinite domains, yes. So these could be continuous values. So here we see mostly categorical, but so there are ways to to handle this. So you can discretize numerical values and then treat them as categoricals. And then if you do that, yeah, you make things discrete. But there are no guarantees that you're going to find good counterfactuals. So it does not be happy with what you have. There is no golden rule to say stop.

Yeah, so there are no guarantees and systems typically try to find a good coverage enough diverse counterfactuals to give you an impression. So what information do you get? If I have diverse counterfactuals, what also do I get out of this? If you look here, so let's say I know these three directions, what additional information do I get? Yeah, also direction also tells me where is the boundary and how far do I need to go in that direction, right? So it tells me something about the boundary which I could not see, okay, that might be useful. So instead of if I have just one direction, what do I get? I say that, okay, it looks like from where I'm standing, the boundary is just a line. It's a very simple one. But if I have multiple ones, then I somehow create a better understanding of how this looks like.

So, all right. So counterfactuals have to be diverse in order to be useful because, yeah, we might pick not a very good one. So we might want to have some diversity there. Now, how are, how, so we talked about counterfactuals for, for binary classification, but you can somehow extend this idea to things that look like a binary classification. So let me give you an example. So let's say you are interactive. Let's say you are on Amazon and you're clicking things. Or you have already some purchase history. So you click things, you make live reviews. you bought some items and based on the things that you did on Amazon during, I don't know, the last six months, and whatever other people do on Amazon, the system behind this learns something about you.

So it can give you recommendations, personalized recommendations. So for this particular case, for Alice here, Alice did all these actions and Alice was recommended this backpack here. right so alice is asking okay so why why did i get the backpack so how can we give some sort of explanation to alice we are going to look at what are the things she did that did not do some of the of the activities uh would she still be recommended um this um this backpack so essentially we might look for explanation that looks like this so alice asks why did i get this recommendation and the It's because you bought this shoe, this camera, you reviewed this camera, you rated this item. And if you had not done this, then you would get a different recommendation. So if I imagine the hypothetical al is where I go and erase these things from the history. So the output would be instead this iPads, right? So this is a sort of an explanation. to recommendation because we know you like these things basically right but this is also gives some sort of ability to alice to actually go and critique so a no i don't really like this this power bank for example okay so i really prefer to have a recommendation for the ipad over that So she can, by understanding how the model works, the user can actually control or fix the model. All right. So this is an example of how you do explanations for recommender systems.

So let me give you another example. You might know of retriever augmented generation with LLMs. We do in this case. Anyone that has seen RAG, how does it work? Any simple explanation? You're monopolizing, so I'm going to pick for fairness, the second part of the talk. Anyone else wants to. Have you seen who. Have you seen. have you know what RAG is?

So please go ahead, your. You mentioned database, we've done it. It's related to how many people better. Okay, great. So let me repeat this. So the question that goes to the LLM, doesn't go straight to the LLM, goes first to some retriever that picks the documents that are relevant and then puts them into the context of the LLM and internal knowledge. All right, so imagine a scenario where we ask a question. So I don't see the question here. who is the goat in football, right? So this is the question.

And the LLM does some or a retriever bring some data, like statistics about World Cup, how many times people score goals in Champions League or who wins the Ballon d'Or. And based on that, it generates an answer. It says Messi is the goat. All right, so you might start to question the LLM and you say, okay, why do you think Messi? So this is the counterfactual. So you want to see, you want to observe a different outcome, which is the LLM says Ronaldo, and you want to see what are the changes you need to do so that you get that outcome. So what are the changes? The changes are the sources. right so if if for example i don't consider the world cup wins as an important factor so if i remove this source the statistics then maybe ronaldo becomes a better player all right so i might look at the inputs and do something similar with the recommended right so move remove things or maybe i can add additional sources until i observe the output that i want so my my levers that i the different sources okay and you can have some sort of explainability based on the sources okay so so these are how counterfactuals can be used we said there are so according to the definition the counterfactual was supposed to give you the opposite outcome but let's say we want to be a bit more specific we want more than that so we might want something a counterfactual that looks like the factual. So we don't want to change it that much.

So this vector that we have to traverse isn't that big, or we want to minimize it. So then it becomes a sort of optimization problem. So what you see here is again the same y is the original output for the x. and Y prime is the desired outcome. So let's say Ronaldo is the goat. Okay, so what do you want? You want to find this X prime, this counterfactual, so that the output looks like your desired outcome. And at the same time, the factual and the counterfactual are not very far from each other. Okay, so X and X prime are close to each other. X prime gives you something which is very, very close to Y hat.

Okay, so you can think of this as the probability that the model will output. Ronaldo is there. All right, so what do you want from counterfactuals? You explanations, you want them to be similar. Okay, you don't want the action to be that drastic. You might also want the counterfactual explanation to be probable. So if I'm X and I become X prime, I want the X prime to be something realistic. So if, for example, if I apply for the loan, I want the changes compatible with my career path. or the, yeah, how many hours I work what is typical in my field. So there are no positions that accept like 60 hours of work.

So 60 hours of work is not a very probable outcome for me, even though if I were like this, I would get the positive outcome. So I should look like actually the data, so I should stay close to how the data looks like. I don't want to be very far. And so this tells you where is the X prime. The X prime should be close to real data. The other thing is the feasibility. So if there's a change from X to X prime, I want this change to be possible. Okay, so a very immediate thing is I cannot decrease my age. okay so these things are impossible to do still if i decrease my age and put this hypothetical me into the model i might get the desired outcome but why do i care there's no way for me to uh to do that so it's just for understanding how the model works but not actually good for the for me that i want to um achieve an outcome so um so when i make or when i imagine changes to a specific instance i also want to to these changes realistic according to a model of the world right so if i there are some causations in in in the data so if i if i do let's say uh a master's degree i will have one more um years of education, but I will lose one year of work experience. Okay, so you have to model these things in order to be able to see that these X to X prime are both probable and feasible.

And some people also assume there's a model that gives you this sort of validity. Okay, so. If I see things from the perspective of the end user, the person that is affected, in case Rosa, she rejected, she was rejected. So what does Rosa care? She doesn't really care about understanding how the model looks like. She doesn't care for that. She just wants to implement some changes in her application so that she can get the outcome. okay so when we are in this situation where we are we want to give to people a plan to follow so that they can get the positive right outcome we call this recourse and so algorithmic recourse is a is a plan some instructions you need to take some actions so that you get the desired outcome okay and in some situations in some fields The company that employs or in general in in in other decisions, there are some mandates that says that you should also provide a way to reverse this outcome. Okay, so we talk and this is called algorithmic recourse. So it's very, the concept is very similar to the counterfactual explanations.

We said that the explanation is actually the difference between X and X prime. And here the difference is expressed by some sort of action. So what is the action? What is the change? How do I need to go from X to X prime? So it's this action or a combination of actions that brings recourse to an individual. It means they take the person from the negative to the positive class. In terms of actions, it is typically associated with some cost. there is a cost function that says how difficult or how much investment does it take to implement this particular change but so typically this is um this is um not very straightforward how to define what changes means and how much they cost or to put trade-offs between the changes because you need to put everything into a single number. How do you value, I don't know, work experience with education experience?

Okay, so let me see. Okay, so maybe we can take a break here. So I haven't finished with explanations. There is one more. Okay, so 10 minute break. i but yeah so sorry i don't think it's a bad idea to uh to look at the uh derivative of uh no conditional probability and then see which parts you have to be in or no no no if you can it's a very good idea actually and it's what people do uh so you know how the um you your loss function changes and then you go into that direction. Because you want to play with the parameters and see how we're. If you look at the derivatives matrix, you see the directions that when you go with it. Exactly, exactly. Yeah, yeah, yeah.

So it will give you the direction to the closest point. Yeah, so that's what people do actually, yeah. But there are situations where you don't have this. you have a completely black box and you don't know where to go but uh you know like you always have your learned function if you have it right if you if you have the learned function plus the the gradients then you can do this uh but there are situations where you just interact so you you don't see anything you don't see your learned function yeah and then you have to randomly yeah looking at the other um data you might have some data and tell you okay it looks like i'm should go this way something like this yeah good thanks Okay. It would be a very long time to speak with us. It's a very good idea. Well, that's really great for you. It's really important for people. So let's see online. There are other things which I don't get to take questions.

It's kind of a case of serious questions. Yeah, we like it. It's a good answer. So yeah, well, thank you. I see many times more people. I don't know. But I'm full-fascist. Sorry about this. It's fine. I'm sick of that.

explore um thank you all of this yeah yeah people leave all sort of things behind here i see yeah okay i will not continue to tell you actually no there's no atrimonium so the assignments we've got well they have to choose first and we can move on topics and it's a phenomenal solution we'll see the list here no i support two percent okay obviously so you may find the early little bit fast growing it's reading material i assume you don't consider it it's a very good idea like yeah you know i'm not interested For me, I want to give topics, all the topics. So I'll give you some feedback. I'm not an expert on this, so maybe they can look at some material about something. do you think it's not supposed to be like that before the sound would be able to help because it doesn't make sense nobody will do it but if you want to do something i probably from this and i make interest invest some time so my interest goes outside And I think that it's a good question. But I'm just going to give you a little bit of time. I think it's just so good that you can be able to speak to them. That was the biggest moment of consulting. So this is the first time for those who are interested in the research. And then we see how similar research is. Yes, that's right.

yeah Thank you. thank you yeah yeah so you can um so this is a general idea so you go around your area and you see how what are positive what is negative it's one of the ways to have uh this local explainability so it's yeah it works very very nicely yeah uh i think yeah i think this is the best Hi. I forgot what your statement, but it also has a program project. So the project will be on one of the topics that we have here. So I will collect all these topics. I will have a list and hopefully some reading material. You can pick something and you work on this in a group. And then they will be evaluated for the projects, but orally also, you know, field that you choose, a topic that you chose. and a bit more general. So I think I will combine the two things.

There's no theoretical exam. No, no, no, no, no, on the URL. Basically, what are you applying? Ten points? Yes, so ten points for the exam and ten points for the presentation. So you're going to be evaluating for the presentation, but I'm going to ask at the same time questions about the whole course. About every seminar. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. With a bit focused on what you did for the projects. So it will be like a combination of.

So you should have a general understanding plus go deep in one of these areas. And I saw that on your schedule this, there's days where there's no seminar? That's true. That's true. There's no seminar. so there's just no class on the day but there's nothing yes so uh yeah it might be like the topic is not known yet okay but then it's a date there is a date so you should know that on every date there should be a topic it might be empty but there will be so next week there will be one it hasn't been announced yet Okay, so if there's no date, means no lecture. And the team CBO at the office here is a Sunday? Some of them are there, yeah. So, but we record everything and we, it's on the VUB websites. They should be there.

Yeah, okay. Thank you. Okay, let us continue. Ah, yes, an announcement. research possible for the findings here. So you have time till the clock. So that's it. Thank you. Okay, so let's move from local explainability to global explainability. So what is the.

We want some general understanding of the model. Okay, so this is global. So we are not focused on particular instances. this is something more global. So what can we do is we can, one idea would be to go for every at every local point, or at least at the points where we had training data and observe what is the counterfactuals, and then use all these counterfactuals to create a small summary. So what would the summary look like? So if you're not looking at a particular instance, how can you say exactly what is going to be for a set of instances? How can you say this is going to be my counterfactual explanation? So you have to think of the change. So what is the change I ask for this individual?

Can I apply this change to a group of individuals? So this change we said we called it an action. So what I would like to have as a global counterfactual explanation is a small set of these actions. And I want these actions to work for many instances, to cover the population, to cover my input data. So here is an example. So there are two levels of if here. So the first if defines a part of the space, of the input space, of the feature space. And I should look now only for foreign workers. And within foreign workers, so this is a subpopulation. I can further see that the people that have years at current home less than one and number of loans in other bank greater than zero, These are, they get the negative outcome, so their loan is rejected.

And if I go and change these things, these two features, I make this greater than three, I make this zero. If I do this, then I get the positive outcome. All right? So this is an action that is not tied to a specific instance. So it holds generally for the people that have these conditions. So the people that are foreign workers and they are. And I tell there's an action. If you take this action, some of you or most of you will get the positive outcome. And I can continue to do that. So I can have another action for the same subpopulation.

So if you're here plus you have these conditions, then if you change this attribute, so from less than one so if you stay more than four years in your job then you should get the loan right so this is again a general action that works for a group of people and i can have different groups of people so if i look at foreign workers non-foreign workers then the actions might be different all right So what have we done so far? We have taken the idea of a change, of an action, and instead of tying to a specific person, we say, okay, we will apply it generally for a group of people. So will this work? Are there guarantees that a single action will affect all these people, right? So that's no longer the case. So now there is some trade-offs to be made. So we take an action and we say, okay, this action for a particular group of people might have an effectiveness. So how many people that were negative become positive through this action? That action also has, right? So imagine we are, yeah, and there's a trade-off between the cost and effectiveness.

Can you imagine this? So let's say we are close to the decision boundary, there's a person there and we see that this guy needs like a small change to make to go to the other side. But that change might not apply for the person that is slightly less years in the job or has lower savings in the bank. Okay, so we might do a similar action but maybe with higher magnitude. So this means that if we have one action and we just make it costlier, we might increase effectiveness. We might lose some people. Okay, that's why there's the trade-off, right? And here is some example of different ways to create, to find actions. And what are the different trade-offs they make? So the more cost we are willing to accept for an action, the more people we can actually give the recourse.

We can make them flip from the negative to the positive. So I want to go up, but I have to pay some price. So if you look, for example, this green line here, by more and more and more expensive actions, I can try to bring effectiveness around maybe 90 or close to 100. In a different way, it says it's easier to get something up to 80%, and I will get you 100 with cheaper. So I will provide some different actions. So now it becomes a bit of a different problem. So we want to find a set of actions, a set of changes that are few. We don't want to give you very specific actions. Why is this bad? It will look like local, so I will not be able to have an interpretability.

If I give you as many actions as the feature as the training data, let's say, I'm not giving you any interpretability. So I need to summarize. All right, so I need to summarize. I need to have these things together to be able to cover many individuals. This means that they will give me a good understanding of how the model behaves. So just to visualize the difference, that this is a different problem, imagine you have these two points here, X1 and X2. Now, you are in the negative area. These both are in the negative area. And you want to go to the positive. And all these points are different directions, are different actually actions, right?

So A1 is an action that takes me to the other side. A3 takes me to the other side. A5 takes me to the other side, okay? This is for X1 and something similar for X2. Something that has the smallest, let's say, vector. So let's say you measure. um you measure the cost by how far is the is the um the decision boundary so maybe this one a1 here is the one that is closest is the one that is cheapest right for x2 it's this one a2 all right so if i solve the problem locally optimally for the local scenario I might say, have I solved it globally? So what is the global solution? I want, let's say, to find one action that will take both to the happy side. So which action should I take?

All right. Or so it's something that is somehow in between them. So it's the A3 that looks like this. And the way to see this is if you somehow get this point here and that point here and bring them one on top of the other, they will see the decision boundary from different perspective. So this is what is drawn here. The blue one is the decision boundary from the perspective of x1. And L2 is the perspective of x2. I just put them together at the same place. All right, so now you can see that if I take action three, I will be able to cross the border, the decision boundary for both cases. And actually X2 is, sorry, A3 here is the best option compared to A1 that only crosses the border for one, for the second one.

Okay, so this tells you that it is finding the local counterfactuals is not enough to solve the global thing. So here's what we can do. What I can do is I can look at the feature space and say, if people look close to each other, then they probably are, then probably for them it's the same action. to take them to the other side, right? So if they are close to each other with respect to the boundary, then maybe I should go, for all of them, I should go like there. So clustering looks like a good idea, right? But not only based on where the features are, but also how the actions look like. So for example, in this case, so these guys here, they might, they have different ways of reaching the other side. But if I look at this, if I look at this direction, then these guys become similar to that, to those guys. Those guys are not similar in terms of features, but they are similar in terms of the action that they can take.

So I can do some sort of clustering on both spaces. So bring these red guys together and these green guys together and be able to find fewer actions that work for more people okay so that is uh the idea of uh of one methods okay so another another idea would be to say um you know what i don't really care about the actions i don't want to return some actions i want to return basically the direction so i want to know which way to go so if we are um all these people here and the decision boundary looks like this, so it is somehow clear that there's a single direction that would work for all of us. But instead of giving you just one action, I will tell you do this for five units of space, whatever that means. I will let every point pick their own magnitude along this direction, so I can have a different different personalized action for every one direction. All right, so this is another way to summarize things. Yeah, exactly, yes. So in this case, you might say, you know, you might say, I really want to know the direction. So I don't really care about the magnitude I should follow. That's okay. There's a summary.

So this like tells you if you're in this part of the space, your border is probably like from looking from that direction. Okay, so that is concludes the things I wanted to say about explainability. So we talked about how the summaries of these in order to have a better global understanding of the whole model. So this is global counterfactuals. So, let's move to fairness to the other topic and let's make a very brief introduction. So, what is fairness for AI or fairness for algorithms is essentially you want, you have decisions, outputs that concern people and you want these outcomes to not discriminate people. Okay, so it's a bit of abstract definition, but you somehow get the idea. There are different ways to define this and based on different definitions. Let me again try to make some general categorization. Yeah, so let me first give you this definition.

So we can talk about individual fairness and group fairness. So individual fairness concerns a particular person. So if you look at the particular person, you want to see whether they have been mistreated. So how can you define this? How can you define this sort of individual fairness? You want that person to have a similar treatment or impact by the model to someone who is very similar to that one. Okay, or identical or very, very similar in terms of their qualifications for a particular job. You want the outcome to be the same. So you might look at the features that are important for the particular task and say that everybody similar under these features should have the same outcome. So this is an individual way of thinking.

Another way of thinking, and it's typically easier, is to use a protected attribute or sensitive attributes that is race, gender, and group people. So you have all the people that have this particular race and you have groups, racial groups. So what you want is each one of these on average to have the same impact or treatment by the model. Again, whatever this exactly means, but you are comparing groups of people based on categorization by some attributes that you consider to be sensitive. So visually this looks like I'm comparing here, for example, group A with group B, males with females, On individual, I look at where that person is and I look around them. So what is similar and see whether all the people have the same outcome. So if I'm rejected the loan, do everybody similar to me have been rejected alone? So this is what I want to understand. And there's also something in between. I might create subgroups, subpopulations, and look at subpopulations.

So in general, males and females are treated the same. That's okay. But what if I consider those that have a family, that have children? Is there the same treatment? So I'm taking one attribute and I'm. splitting it down further into being married or not married, gender or. So I'm combining attributes to see whether people are still treated fairly or not. Okay, so we will be talking briefly about individual fairness, but mostly about group and subgroup or subpopulation. The thing I will not talk about is what to do. So I will tell you about the definitions.

What does it mean to be fair or not fair? But I will not touch what you can do to and change how the model is trained basically. Okay, so fairness at the individual level. So how can we express this with the lenses of counterfactuals? So the original definition says that two people are to similar people should get similar outcomes. All right, so this is the definition of individual fairness, basically. So here we have a person I and a person J. And XI and XJ are very similar. They might differ on some protected attributes, but this should be relevant. So what I want is the outputs to be similar.

So how can we think of a counterfactual definition for this? So I'm a person, right? And imagine a situation where I have a different protected value, right? So if I am the counterfactual version of me, would I get the same outcome, right? So this is not pairing me with some similar like me, but imagining a situation where I have my features different. So this is the idea of counterfactual fairness. So if I change some features, some protected values, right? So if I change, I don't know, my race, it means that I would grow up maybe in another country and then I would have some other kind of I don't know, education. So all these things will be affected. How will these things be affected?

How will my counterfactual me be affected using the causal model that tells us exactly how my counterfactual imaginary version of me would look like. So you need some sort of causal model. a value. So I go from A, which is one value for the protected attribute, into A plus, which is another value. And this is a symbol for counterfactual. So this is the factual version, this is the counterfactual. So how would the outcomes change? All right, so this is a way we can define fairness counterfactually. Let's look at definitions. So what does it mean Yeah, yes.

This is the view over it, right? I guess the fact that you changed the action, but. Something like. Change observations, I feel intuitively. Yeah, so this is actually. So in the notation of Perl, so these are not expressed with do operations. So, counterfactual is not expressed with do. So, they have this notation here, which is. Joint probability distribution. That's why it derives A, big A state, sub J state.

Yes, yeah, yeah, yeah. I want here to pick people like me. So, this is the U is the things that somehow differ about me. And this is what I want to change. given that this is the somehow the start. So, but yeah, there are possibly different ways to define this and there are more complicated ways to think about this. This is at the individual level, so it doesn't say that for everybody should hold this thing. But yeah, this is the notation that I think it is borrowed from Judea Pearl. So this is the. counterfactual so it's not exactly a do i don't exactly now remember why they don't do it like this they don't especially interesting that the right sorry is the same it's not do this presents you trained them all about change well good thank you um okay so for many reasons um individual fairness is very hard so that's why people focus on the group level so they want to understand um what things we can say on average about groups of people.

And there are different notions of fairness for a group. So if I look at two groups, what might be fair? So fairness could be that I don't actually look at all at the protected attributes. So I'm blind to this one. So the model doesn't see anything. So it cannot pick up any sort of bias. it with the protected one and give you and might cause unfairness. So you might actually want to actually use the protected attributes and do something about it. So if you have awareness about this, then you might say I want to have the positive outcome to be equally between the two groups. what I see here, 60% get the loan, either if it's males or females, that's good.

You might also want to say that that's not exactly fair for me. Fairness for me means that among those that were able to repay the loan, do I get 60% of those people in males and females to get the loan? so this is another definition of equal opportunity so um so they pick one of the metrics and they say for me fairness means equal metric between the groups so if that metric is just the positive rate then it's statistical parity if it is something like uh recall then it is um it's called equal opportunity and the important thing that maybe you should know is that All these things are incompatible with each other. So in general, you cannot satisfy all of them. So you have to pick what kind of fairness or what kind of unfairness actually you have, you introduce. Okay, so basically all these definitions can be expressed like give me a metric. The predictions become independent of the protected attributes. All right, so this means there's no correlation between a protected attribute and the outcome. And that is the typical definition of group fairness. But you might care about not exactly correlation, you might care about causation.

Okay, so in order to do the causation, you need to actually have something stronger, which means you need to have a model of the world, a structural model. telling you exactly what are the causes and effects. And if you have that, if you have a causal model, then you can actually ask for no causation. So you can ask for, I want the protected attributes to not cause differences in the predictions. So this is possible to define this, but you need to have stronger assumptions. So all of these definitions previously can be somehow translated into causal versions, where you move from correlation to causation. Okay, let me tell you what you can do with counterfactuals. So with counterfactuals, you can actually discover some sort of unfairness. So imagine you have some group of people X that are defined by these characteristics, right? And they get rejected.

The loan gets rejected for them. And then you apply your counterfactual algorithm and says that the minimal changes so that maybe 80% of the people receive the salary, right? So this is a very strong indication that there is a discrimination, right? So if If instead of me applying as a male, I apply, if me applying, if someone applied as a female, they applied as a male, they would get the loan, then this is a clear indication that there is unfairness. All right, so you can use these counterfactuals if you don't restrict them, or if you actually guide them to tell you, go change the protected attributes to find how realistic this is. so this is one way that you can use it another way that you can actually it's a different definition of fairness is if you look at the recourse so we said that recourse is what so we can ask what does fairness of recourse mean so if if the males and that apply for the loan are given a specific set of actions and the females are given a different set of actions that are very, very different or very, very costly, then there is unfairness. So here's an example. So we are, there are two groups, males and females. All of these are in the negative outcome. And they want to go to the positive outcome.

So this is the idea of recourse. so if you if you if you look at these people here there's a bunch of there's a group of females that it is harder for them to cross the boundary right another thing you can do is look at a sub population let's say instead of looking at males and females i'm looking at males under 40 and females under 40 right so now i've selected these people that are under 40 and then i look at them now this guy is here emails become more difficult to get the positive outcome. All right. So the idea is that you want to identify these situations. You want to find for which subgroups you might have different kind of resources, of recourse, right? And then you can define different ways okay so one thing one so you have two groups and you might say okay so i'm looking at two groups and then i want the average cost for group one and group two to be the same okay so you can have something like equal burden for both of them all right um or you can um say that here is a set of actions that are possible for this group of people Now, if I look at group one and group two, will the same number of people achieve the positive outcome? So this is something like equal effectiveness. Is there a way for both groups to be, for the set of actions to be equally effective? Things like this or within a budget, right? You can think different ways that you can call this trade-offs.

And there can be a tool that can. that can search the model for you. So this is the idea of having something called an audit, a fairness audit. So I give the model and then I have to come up with a decision. Is it fair or not fair based on some definition? So an audit would tell you that look at these two groups. So this concerns people with these characteristics. But if I look closer between males and females, the way to achieve recourse is much, much easier for males than females. Okay, so this means for this particular group is not giving good alternatives, good actions for recourse. Okay, so that concludes the presentation.

So hopefully I motivated you why counterfactuals are useful, both for understanding how the model works, but also for seeing if the model is unfair. And it can also bring additional definitions of unfairness. So any questions you might have? Thank you for your attention.